Weekly Field Notes
Aug 21
Week 6/6! 

Agenda
🌌 Expedition Updates

✨ Team Updates - Round , 3-4 mins each


(note to Madeline – record the call!)

Expedition Updates
✨ Last update call! 

✨ Closing Ceremony next week - slides / video due on Sunday, August 25! ← only teams who submit by this can present and be considered for top prizes 

https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1513eS-0Ugt7l2Ykln0FewuPXZFsnsIioDgFKbVK_Wu8/edit?usp=sharing

✨ 5-min each - will be very strict here.

✨ Judges deliberate for 15 mins, then winners announced in the call! 

✨  Address collection for stickers! https://forms.gle/CQ3TChfVGi7KPC8W6

Expedition Updates
✨ Judges:
Sebastian Ruder
Multilingual Modeling Lead
Marzieh Fadaee
Sr Research Scientist
Alice Schoenauer Sebag
Sr MLR - Safety

Expedition Updates
✨ Top Prize Categories:
Gold - $5,000 Cohere API Credits for the team and digital certificates
Silver - $4,000 Cohere API Credits for the team and digital certificates
Bronze - $3,000 Cohere API Credits for the team and digital certificates
Most Innovative - $2,000 Cohere API Credits for the team and digital certificates
Most Promising - $1,000 Cohere API Credits for the team and digital certificates

Format of team-update
⏱️ Each team will have 3-4 mins to present a 1 slide update of their project.
📣 Use this time to share 
what you’ve been working on, 
what’s coming up next, 
and any open questions or blockers
🛝 Feel free to copy the template on the the next slide or make your own.
✨ Together we’ll see how the C4AI team, or other teams can help
🫡 Captains are responsible for ensuring the 1 slide update is prepared in advance of each meeting, and determining who will present on behalf of the project


Updates

Upcoming

Open Questions

Other

Presenting today:
Vision for the finale: [[[ use this box to share what you plan on sharing at during your 5 min slot at our finale in the last week of August! ]]]
TEAM NAME
TEMPLATE
Copy this slide and fill in, or make your own

Updates
There are geometric difference between global and local harmful content from Aya redteaming dataset when the specific activations are investigated, and this situation happens across different languages
We can steer Aya23 8B using more general harmless and harmful datasets under multilingual settings
Upcoming
Prepare the final presentation
Start drafting a workshop paper to summarise all findings and experimental results using Aya23 8B
Plan to test more LLMs under multilingual settings
Open Questions
How do we upload our presentation by Aug 26?
Other

Presenting today: Ruizhe Li
Vision for the finale: 
Mechanistically Understanding Aya

Updates
Evals run for our initial models. Dist-Qwen2-1.5B. Teacher model Aya-23-8B.

Tried pruning without recovery training. (50% pruning).

Also trying pruning with smaller loss.
Presenting today: Guijin Son
Vision for the finale: 
DistAYA

Multi-Agent Aya for Workforce 
Updates
Finalise multi-agent MVP - add RAG for company context and allow retrieval  
Implemented new features for Aya assistant : Documentation-on-the-Go and Summarize
Included new LLM backends : Claude, Aya 23. Current performance - Claude > ChatGPT > Aya
Finalise dialogue dataset for 2 latin and 2 non-latin based languages
Upcoming
Finalise dataset and dev work,
Finalise repo
final presentation
Presenting today: Mahdi, Roshan
Problem statement:Building teams, breaking barriers - seamless communication beyond language 
Open Questions
https://discord.com/channels/1111315570160320636/1273236583738511432


Updates

Partnered with multilingual experts to develop Aya speaker datasets in 6 languages total 
Involved refining sub-datasets used
Generated embeddings for all combinations of data
Performed and evaluated clustering results
Performed data augmentation with cosine similarity with promising results
Streamlined our code for better efficiency 
Developed initial training script
Upcoming

Develop positive and negative pairs in our data
Positive: same style (speaker), different content
Negative: different style (speaker), same content
Performing contrastive model learning & training
Performing thorough evaluation and modeling testing
Open Questions

Embedding context window - input sequence length limit (i.e, 8192)
Number of slides in final deck
Other

Stretch goal of using cosine similarity and LLM output to generate style-consistent translation with multiple outputs
Explore cross-linguistic style differences
Presenting today: Katrina + Karishma
Vision for the finale: Findings of a model that takes a pair of text and determines if it is either the same or different style. This will be language agnostic.
St-Aya-L
St-Aya-L

Maya: Multimodal Aya 
Updates
Bug fixing on instruction tuning.
Verification script on dataset quality improvement.
Initial Evaluation on Preamble used to create translations is Done.
Toxic content is being analyzed in two ways, Image analysis with LlavaGuard 34B & Text analysis of GPT values with Toxic Bert. 
Upcoming
Rerun instruct-tuning.
Run the evaluation script on instruction tuning.
Fix the bad translations in 4.7M Dataset.
New High Quality Dataset that don't contain Toxic, Bad translations.
Presenting today: Nahid,Karthik
Vision for the finale:
Release the Maya-8b-llava1.5-Siglip model in 8 languages on Hugging Face.

Release Dataset of the Maya-llava-pretrain on HF along with evaluation results on all translations (Dataset).

Updates
Data cleaning
Synthetic Dataset
Human Dataset
Data analysis
Data visualization KDE
Designing
Label platform ready for deployment


Upcoming
Testing platform
Collect Human Labels
Verify data cleaning
Presenting today: Agustin Garagorry, Rosina Garagorry
Vision for the finale: [[[ https://www.figma.com/proto/mSvdKBY2YKmGayQIqN1LqC/Aya?page-id=0%3A1&node-id=1-2&viewport=-1051%2C636%2C0.35&t=BapOjY8vrzfuGKCe-1&scaling=contain&content-scaling=fixed&starting-point-node-id=1%3A2&share=1 ]]]
Multilingual Crisis Management

The Language Effect
On Political Knowledge and Opinions
Updates

added a deeper analysis of the Aya dataset with a focus on political statement topics and stances
analyzed the correlation (human vs LLM w/ language li) with the actual survey results from EUandI
new BorderLine robustness checks and added the EUandI 2024 results
many new figures and updating the report
Upcoming

finishing our final event slides
finalizing the first report draft


beyond the project: 
adding more (open) LLMs to the pipeline
setting up a benchmarking site with the evaluated LLMs
Presenting today: Christopher
Vision for the finale: We plan to show the results of three political bias tests and the political statement topics in the datasets for languages in Aya 23. We will also present a small example of how to integrate this language robust testing. 
Liberal Society
Environmental Protection
German
English
⬇️ -50%
⬇️ -66.14%
higher means 
more different

Updates
Translated RB to 3 langs using Google Translate API.
Evaluated GPT-4/Aya/ Gemma/Llama on new translations.
NLLB-3.3B translation poor in Chinese.
Upcoming
Human annotations are almost finished.
Paper writing in progress.
More ablations?
Open Questions
What amt of drop is *now* significant?
Ablations?
Presenting today: Srishti
Vision for the finale: A high-quality evaluation benchmark (datasets + leaderboard) for multilingual reward models.
RM Multilingual (1/2)
Agreement on 40 Samples
Indonesian:
Human vs RB:          66.7%
Human vs Llama3.1-8b: 50.0%

Spanish:
Human vs RB:          80.0%
Human vs Llama3.1-8b: 60.0%

RM Multilingual (2/2)
Aya23-35B shows 8.7% improvement on avg. with Google-Translate over NLLB-3.3B.
Improvements in Chinese is mentionable (5-10%); NLLB poor in Chinese/Korean/Japanese.
BTRM shows performance degradation with Google-Translate for Indonesian/Hindi.
The gap for English vs Multilingual is high for classifier models (> +10%) vs the generative models (max 6%).

Updates
50 Multi-turn conversations (Cultural Context based)
4 Languages (Hindi English Gujarati and Marathi) 
Novelty: Code switching consideration
Linguistic Parameters defined and human rating provided. (Sample demonstration of pragmatics eval)
1 page position paper to discuss the data expansion strategies with the dataset release and linguistic eval framework
Upcoming
Push data to hugging face hub.
Achieve our vision for the finale.
Future Works.
Work on more languages.
Proper evaluation of dataset.
Presenting today: Aniruddha Walke/Guneet Singh
Vision for the finale: Human Preference based dataset, linguistic Framework based Technical Paper, slides and a video demo.
Sanskriti Aya
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1NjXswSOk6dZOFWHX4JGi2YjhCxnEd4Uh-vt3A_jVs60/edit?gid=0#gid=0


Updates
Bug fixes on how retrieval + black box llm code.
Final dataset generation done.
Finetune dataset on our models
Upcoming
Evaluate Models.
Push models to hugging face hub.
Work on the frontend of our hugging face space.
Record a video demo for the finale.
Future Works.
Work on more languages.
Proper evaluation of dataset.
Presenting today: Mardiyyah Oduwole
Vision for the finale: Hugging face spaces, github repo, slides and a video demo.
Multilingual Document Understanding

Updates
Instruction & sample response quality check
Response Generation w/ Few-shot (On-going)
Upcoming
Overall Instruction Dataset quality check
Instruction Dataset Release
Open Questions

Other

Presenting today: Hyunwoo Ko
Vision for the finale: Release final instruction dataset
Korean Instruction Dataset

Synthetic Multilingual Instruction Generation 
Updates

-> We’ve all the Datasets ready:
1. Orca Hindi Dataset (Avoids transliteration, English words etc)
2. Orca English only (Can be used by others for further translations)
3. Orca Complete Dataset Distilled from Llama 70B 3.1
4. Context based Dataset from Wiki Corpora. We were able to create 7-8 Diverse Tasks such as Extractive Q&A, Long form Q&A, Question Generation
5. FLAN Long Form Dataset

-> We decided to finetune on Together AI considering the cheaper costs. We’ll be going with Llama 3.1 8B or else Mistral 7B Model 

-> Discussed on what to present in Final Meeting

Upcoming

Finetuning on Orca Dataset and Benchmarking Models
Presenting today: Desik
Vision for the finale: 

Open Source:
1. Open Source all the 5-6 Diverse Long Form Non Licensed Datasets we have 
2. Benchmark and publish the results of each of this Dataset (We might Benchmark for major ones) 
3. We also think this Long Form Datasets might be SOTA for low resource languages


Synthetic Multilingual Instruction Generation (2/3) 
Presenting today: Desik
Orca with GPT4 Distillation (Licensed) 
Orca Distilled from Llama 70B (Non Licensed)
Take 
Instructions
Open Source
Orca Only English
Open Source: 
People can use for their language
Orca Hindi
Open Source: 
We expect this to be SOTA 😊
FLAN 
(Normal + COT)
FLAN Long Form + COT with 20K instructions with equal distribution of each Task
Open Source
ORCA DATA PIPELINE
Translation
Filtering 
FLAN DATA PIPELINE

Synthetic Multilingual Instruction Generation (3/3) 
Presenting today: Desik
Hindi Corpora
Articles with 500-2K characters
Generate Q&A Pair using LLM (20K)
Take questions from this to Generate Long Q&A (7K)
2 Different Instructions:
1. Long Form Q&A
2. Get Question from Answer
5 Different Instructions:
1. Extractive Q&A
2. Give Answer given [context & question]
3. Give the question given Context
4. Give a question without Context
……


Final Dataset (20K)
Descriptive Questions 
CONTEXT BASED SYNTHETIC PIPELINE

Project Overview
Aim: To determine if the perplexity of a sequence can be used to assess whether the model is more likely to answer it correctly.
Setup: Aya-23 8B and 35B (In-Use), Command Models (Next Step)
Datasets: Okapi HellaSwag (Finished),Okapi MMLU,ARC and Expedition-MMLU (Next Step)
Evaluation Setup: Via LMEvalHarness
Metrics Consulted: Generation likelihood based accuracy for MCQ benchmarks and Byte + Word level perplexity (to remain tokenizer agnostic)

Presenting today: 
Roshan & Mohammad Aflah Khan 
Perplexity v/s Evaluation (1/2)
Updates:

Pre-trained languages have better model performance and lower perplexity (word and byte) than untrained languages


Word and Byte perplexity don't have a linear relationship. 
Languages with highest word perplexity : Armenian, Kannada, Telugu. Languages with highest byte perplexity : Basque, Hungarian, Serbian. 
English has the lowest word perplexity but not in the lower half for byte perplexity 

While byte perplexity doesn't show much difference with model performance, with word perplexity, lower perplexity shows correlation with higher model performance.


Perplexity v/s Evaluation (2/2)

Upcoming

Scale runs to remaining models x datasets 

Investigate byte v/s word perplexity, their relationship and its effects

Effect of benchmark source (translated v/s human vetted)

Effect of type of benchmark

Understand the significance of samples with outlier perplexity values

Write a paper 😁

Updates
We encountered issues with ChromaDB in deployments, so we switched to the Pinecone DB API to increase speed and simplify deployment.
With PineconeDB, we were able to implement hierarchical search by creating document summaries.
This also allowed us to incorporate hybrid search and BM25 for better retrieval.

Other
Issues with production key to get app working
Presenting today: Maryam and Luis
Vision for the finale: Demo of Chatbot, slides on objective, architecture, Scoring and next steps
Multi-lingual Climate Change Chatbot
Upcoming
Team focusing on finishing slides

Enhancing Sinhala NLP



Updates
Fine-tuned gemma-2-9b model on 1M translated flan dataset 


Developed the evaluation pipeline using lm-evaluation-harness on the sinhala-MMLU

Upcoming
Run the evaluation pipeline on the fine-tuned model and other open source models that supports sinhala
Open Questions

Other
Running keras model on
lm-evaluation-harness 
Presenting today: Chamath
Vision for the finale: Demo a fine-tuned LLM for Sinhala, release an instruction dataset in Sinhala, and release an evaluation dataset for the LLM on the Sinhala language.

Updates
Worked on red-teaming existing proprietary models to see what potential issues to look out for   Does purposefully adding spelling errors work ? worked on some, maybe didn’t add spell check internally   Does adding emojis in the text work ? worked on most, maybe emojis weren’t present in their training data 
Planned implementation approaches for various use cases
   higher focus on recall for social media usage (maybe F0.5 as metric) to avoid bots slipping away
   higher focus on precision for academic and other domains to avoid false allegations of AI usage
Comparing ensemble approaches   How many models might be appropriate ? how should the voting work ?   Are the mis-classified parts same in outputs of all models ?  
Performing error analysis   Are the metrics equally good when machine-human proportion in the texts varies ?   Are completely human-written/machine-generated texts recognised accurately ?
Comparing features in the portions generated by LLMs with human written portions   What gives out that a text isn’t likely written by a human ? POS tag proportions ? sentence length ? complex vocabulary ? and are these observed across other domain/LLM texts ?    
Vision for the finale: HF Space Demo of our work, comparisons with existing work, extension plans
Multilingual Machine Generated Text Portions Detection

Updates
We fine tuned and did some evaluation on our models for English-to-Sanskrit translation and question-answering
Uploaded the dataset for translation and Q&A on huggingface

Upcoming
Evaluating on BLEU score and other metrics
Comparison between different models
Presenting today: Vivek
Vision for the finale: We are planning to open source recipes, synthetic dataset and Sanskrit LLMs for chat application, translation and for specific documents and books.

Samskrutha LLM
FastText language classification (Win rate in %)
English-to-Sanskrit translation
98.90%
Q & A
ROUGE score
FastText language classification (Win rate in %)
Base model
     0.06174 
                                   27.11 %
Fine Tuned model
     0.19111
                                   73.33 %

Updates
More Language MCQs added:
Dutch
Hindi
Telugu
Kannada
Nepali
Bengali
German
Ukrainian
Malay
Persian
More data being added
Lots of questions from different exams
LLM based OCR/processing for speedup.
Different Variety:
Driving Exams
High School
Competitive
Teachers Position
Type of question diversity
Upcoming
More language coverage.
Community Contributions.
Formatting and provenance.
Different Topics/exam style.
Open Questions
Better free OCR tools/pipelines.
Continent Coverage
More contributors/processors
Other

Presenting today: Harsha
Vision for the finale: Large coverage of languages with at least 100 questions for each of them, in order to ensure representation, and what can make into the eventual paper.
Global exams

Updates
Results for running GCG and AdvPrompter on Aya-8B and Llama 3.1 8B.
Presenting today: Nishaanth Kanna
Vision for the finale: Presentation on the Multilingual adversarial robustness of the models, [stretch] release an adversarially robust aya model and the associated paper.
Multilingual Adversarial Robustness
Conclusion:
Even models that have been specifically trained to be adversarially robust (Llama 3.1), fail in multilingual adversarial scenarios. 
Upcoming
Specific analysis on these scenarios:languages present in both the models;present only in Aya;not-present in both the models 
Full experiments on 25 different harmful behaviors with test size of 100 harmful behaviors
Release ASR comparison for multilingual/english attacks on both the models. 
[stretch goal] language specific analysis
[stretch goal] finetune the Aya model to be adversarially robust, multilingually.

Updates
Data
Mixing Speech data + General Instruction data to avoid catastrophic forgetting
+3M samples

Model
Training script
Tried training Aya-8B, but it's too big for our resources
Switching to Qwen-2 1.5B
Vocab extended with 1026 speech tokens.


Upcoming
Finish the training of Qwen-2 1.5B
Evaluation
Open Questions
Full training instead of LoRA?
Other

Presenting today: Yaya
Vision for the finale:
SpeechAya

Questions?

Expedition AYA
